labs/lab-1/README.md, before:

# Getting started

_Ensure that you are logged in to your Ansible Tower server as the **student** user._

You are the operator at Tangible Labs Inc. and tasked with setting up servers for the company's new application that's based on WildFly Swarm, which is a modern and tiny application server. After attending several sessions on automation, you've decided to give Ansible a go.

The first lab will help you verifying the Ansible installation and getting acquainted with basic Ansible concepts.

But first, let's verify that Ansible has been installed. On the command-line interface run the following command:

```
$ansible --version
```

You should see output similar to this:

```
$ansible --version
ansible 2.6.3
  config file = /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg
  configured module search path = [u'/root/.ansible/plugins/modules', u'/usr/share/ansible/plugins/modules']
  ansible python module location = /usr/lib/python2.7/site-packages/ansible
  executable location = /bin/ansible
  python version = 2.7.5 (default, May 31 2018, 09:41:32) [GCC 4.8.5 20150623 (Red Hat 4.8.5-28)]
```

As you can see Ansible uses Python. If you inspect the config file (/etc/ansible/ansible.cfg) file, you will find the following configuration:

```
[defaults]

# some basic default values...

#inventory      = /etc/ansible/hosts
#library        = /usr/share/my_modules/
#module_utils   = /usr/share/my_module_utils/
```

The most important for a beginning is the default location of the inventory file. The inventory file contains a list of servers that you are managing. The servers can be grouped in any way you like. For this lab, group the servers into load balancers (lbservers) and WildFly Swarm application servers (wildflyservers).

Before we continue on, make sure that the $WORK_DIR variable is defined. If $WORK_DIR is not defined, [take a look at the preparations.](https://github.com/mglantz/ansible-roadshow/tree/master/labs/lab-0)
Now, create a file named *hosts* in the *$WORK_DIR* folder.

```
cd $WORK_DIR
touch hosts
```
Please note: you got three servers assigned to you, it doesn't matter which one is put in the [lbservers] section and which remaining two are put in the [wildflyservers] section during lab 1.

Add the following text to the file:

```
[lbservers]
client_system_1 ansible_host=xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx

[wildflyservers]
client_system_2 ansible_host=yyy.yyy.yyy.yyy
client_system_3 ansible_host=zzz.zzz.zzz.zzz
```
where x, y and z values are replaced by the ip numbers for servers assigned to you.

Since this is the first time we're connecting to these servers, you'll need to accept the identity of the servers.
To speed up the process, we can use the ssh-keyscan command to accept identities. Like so:

```
ssh-keyscan -H xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx yyy.yyy.yyy.yyy zzz.zzz.zzz.zzz >> ~/.ssh/known_hosts
```

You are now ready to run your first Ansible module. To do so, run the following command from *$WORK_DIR*

```
cd $WORK_DIR
ansible -i hosts all -m ping
```

This command will run the ping command on all servers in the hosts file (specified by -i). The -u parameter is used to sign into the servers as the root user. ** If the previous step failed, you might be asked to accept the identity of the servers.** Type yes for each server. After running the ping command, you'll have following output

```
35.159.18.245 | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
54.93.67.223 | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
54.93.150.126 | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
```

Congratulations! :smile: :tada: You've run your first Ansible command.
For a more detailed explanation of what is going on, try running the same command but add the *-vvv* parameter

```
cd $WORK_DIR
ansible -vvv -i hosts all -m ping
```

Basically, the command will ssh to each host and run the ping module on the host. The result is captured by Ansible in a return variable. (If you are interested in the content of a module, see the source code for the ping module [in the github repo for modules](https://github.com/ansible/ansible-modules-core/blob/devel/system/ping.py). You don't have to. Modules will be covered in a later lab.)

In the next lab, you'll write your first playbook using the ping module to get a better understanding of how Ansible works.

```
End of lab
```
[Go to the next lab, lab 2](../lab-2/README.md)

Commit message:

Added how to create file without text editor

labs/lab-1/README.md, after:

# Getting started

_Ensure that you are logged in to your Ansible Tower server as the **student** user._

You are the operator at Tangible Labs Inc. and tasked with setting up servers for the company's new application that's based on WildFly Swarm, which is a modern and tiny application server. After attending several sessions on automation, you've decided to give Ansible a go.

The first lab will help you verifying the Ansible installation and getting acquainted with basic Ansible concepts.

But first, let's verify that Ansible has been installed. On the command-line interface run the following command:

```
ansible --version
```

You should see output similar to this:

```
$ ansible --version
ansible 2.6.3
  config file = /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg
  configured module search path = [u'/root/.ansible/plugins/modules', u'/usr/share/ansible/plugins/modules']
  ansible python module location = /usr/lib/python2.7/site-packages/ansible
  executable location = /bin/ansible
  python version = 2.7.5 (default, May 31 2018, 09:41:32) [GCC 4.8.5 20150623 (Red Hat 4.8.5-28)]
```

As you can see Ansible uses Python. If you inspect the config file (/etc/ansible/ansible.cfg) file, you will find the following configuration:

```
[defaults]

# some basic default values...

#inventory      = /etc/ansible/hosts
#library        = /usr/share/my_modules/
#module_utils   = /usr/share/my_module_utils/
```

The most important for a beginning is the default location of the inventory file. The inventory file contains a list of servers that you are managing. The servers can be grouped in any way you like. For this lab, group the servers into load balancers (lbservers) and WildFly Swarm application servers (wildflyservers).

Before we continue on, make sure that the $WORK_DIR variable is defined. If $WORK_DIR is not defined, [take a look at the preparations.](https://github.com/mglantz/ansible-roadshow/tree/master/labs/lab-0)
Now, create a file named *hosts* in the *$WORK_DIR* folder.

```
cd $WORK_DIR
touch hosts
```
Please note: you got three servers assigned to you, it doesn't matter which one is put in the [lbservers] section and which remaining two are put in the [wildflyservers] section during lab 1.

Add the following text to the file using an editor of choice:
```
[lbservers]
client_system_1 ansible_host=xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx

[wildflyservers]
client_system_2 ansible_host=yyy.yyy.yyy.yyy
client_system_3 ansible_host=zzz.zzz.zzz.zzz
```
where x, y and z values are replaced by the ip numbers for servers assigned to you.

**Optionally**, create the content in a text editor on your laptop and paste below (with your IP-addresses) text into a terminal:
```
cat << 'EOF' >$WORK_DIR/hosts
[lbservers]
client_system_1 ansible_host=xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx

[wildflyservers]
client_system_2 ansible_host=yyy.yyy.yyy.yyy
client_system_3 ansible_host=zzz.zzz.zzz.zzz
EOF
```

Since this is the first time we're connecting to these servers, you'll need to accept the identity of the servers.
To speed up the process, we can use the ssh-keyscan command to accept identities. Like so:

```
ssh-keyscan -H xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx yyy.yyy.yyy.yyy zzz.zzz.zzz.zzz >> ~/.ssh/known_hosts
```

You are now ready to run your first Ansible module. To do so, run the following command from *$WORK_DIR*

```
cd $WORK_DIR
ansible -i hosts all -m ping
```

This command will run the ping command on all servers in the hosts file (specified by -i). The -u parameter is used to sign into the servers as the root user. ** If the previous step failed, you might be asked to accept the identity of the servers.** Type yes for each server. After running the ping command, you'll have following output

```
35.159.18.245 | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
54.93.67.223 | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
54.93.150.126 | SUCCESS => {
    "changed": false,
    "ping": "pong"
}
```

Congratulations! :smile: :tada: You've run your first Ansible command.
For a more detailed explanation of what is going on, try running the same command but add the *-vvv* parameter

```
cd $WORK_DIR
ansible -vvv -i hosts all -m ping
```

Basically, the command will ssh to each host and run the ping module on the host. The result is captured by Ansible in a return variable. (If you are interested in the content of a module, see the source code for the ping module [in the github repo for modules](https://github.com/ansible/ansible-modules-core/blob/devel/system/ping.py). You don't have to. Modules will be covered in a later lab.)

In the next lab, you'll write your first playbook using the ping module to get a better understanding of how Ansible works.

```
End of lab
```
[Go to the next lab, lab 2](../lab-2/README.md)
