labs/lab-4/README.md, before:

# Writing the load balancer playbook

In the previous lab, we created two wildfly swarm servers running our application. The next step is to setup a loadbalancer. We will use nginx as the loadbalancer in this lab.

A role has already been written for installing nginx with Ansible. The role can be found at the Ansible Galaxy site (https://galaxy.ansible.com/nginxinc/nginx/). [Ansible Galaxy](https://galaxy.ansible.com) is the place where roles and modules are shared. As always be critical when using content on the internet. In this case the nginx organisation has made an official role for nginx, so we should be good.

First we need to install the role for nginx. Run:

```
$ansible-galaxy install nginxinc.nginx
```

and wait for the role to be installed. When that is done, we can use the role in our playbooks.

To install nginx go to $WORK_DIR and create a new file named *lb.yml* with the following content:

```
---
- hosts: lbservers
  become: true
  tasks:
  - include_role:
      name: nginxinc.nginx
```

run the playbook with the command

```
$ansible-playbook -i hosts lb.yml
```

this will install nginx on the servers in the lbservers group. To verify the installation, go to the url *http://$lb_server_name*. You should get the nginx default page.

Next step is to configure nginx as a loadbalancer for the two wildflyapp servers. To do so, we'll add an additional role for the configuration. We follow the [best practises for Ansible directory layout](http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_best_practices.html) and place tasks, handlers, and vars in separate directories.

```
$mkdir -p $WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/tasks
$mkdir -p $WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/handlers
$mkdir -p $WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/vars
```

First we'll create a handler for restarting the nginx service in case of configuration changes. Define the handler in a file *$WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/handlers/main.yml* with the following content:

```
---
- name: restart-nginx-service
  systemd:
    state: restarted
    daemon_reload: yes
    name: nginx
```

This defines a handler named *restart-nginx-service*, which we'll use in a moment. Now create a file *$WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/tasks/main.yml* with the following content:

```
---
- name: Setup the http listener to your machines
  template:
    src: default.template
    dest: /etc/nginx/conf.d/default.conf
  notify: restart-nginx-service
- name: Ensure nginx is in state started, so it'll be available on restart
  systemd:
    name: nginx
    enabled: yes
    masked: no
    state: started
- name: Set (httpd_can_network_connect) flag on and keep it persistent across reboots
  seboolean:
    name: httpd_can_network_connect
    state: yes
    persistent: yes
```
A template is used to setup the http listener. The template ensures that your configuration file doesn't have to be static. In this case, you need to add the servers to loadbalance between. This is done by introducing a variable *wildfy_servers*, which you'll use when writing the template shortly. The configuration file is saved instead of the default.conf nginx template. Other approaches applies. Please refer to the nginx documentation for more information. If the configuration file is changed, the previously defined handler (*notify: restart-nginx-service*) ensures, that the nginx process is restarted. Finally a SELinux rule has to be setup, to allow nginx to connect to port 8080.

Define the variable *wildfly_servers* in a file named *$WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/vars/main.yml* with the following content:

```
---
wildfly_servers: "{{ groups['wildflyservers'] }}"
```

Edit $WORK_DIR/lb.yml to include the newly created role:

```
---
- hosts: lbservers
  tasks:
  - include_role:
      name: nginxinc.nginx
  - include_role:
      name: nginx-config
```

After having extended the playbook to add the loadbalancer configuration, you need to add the template file for the configuration. First create a folder to store the template

```
$mkdir -p $WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/templates
```

Then in your favorite editor save a file named *default.template* in dir *$WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/templates/* with the following content:

```
upstream backend {
{% for host in wildfly_servers %}
    server {{ hostvars[host].ansible_host }}:8080;
{% endfor %}
}
server {
    listen       80;
    server_name  localhost;
    
    access_log  /var/log/nginx/host.access.log  main;
    
    location / {
        proxy_pass http://backend;
    }
    
    # redirect server error pages to the static page /50x.html
    #
    error_page   500 502 503 504  /50x.html;
    location = /50x.html {
        root   /usr/share/nginx/html;
    }
}
```

as you can see, the *wildfly_servers* variable is used to iterate over the servers with the wildfly application deployed. Apply the new changes to the playbook by running the command:

```
$ansible-playbook -i hosts lb.yml
```

Now test, that you can access the application on both application servers. In the command promt write:

```
$curl -w '\n' http://<server name for nginx server>/
```

you should get a different servername responding each time like in this output:

```
$ curl -w '\n' http://10.211.55.23/
Howdy from unknown at 2018-02-19T14:22:03.375+01:00 (from jboss-server-2)
$ curl -w '\n' http://10.211.55.23/
Howdy from unknown at 2018-02-19T14:22:06.651+01:00 (from jboss-server-3)
$ curl -w '\n' http://10.211.55.23/
Howdy from unknown at 2018-02-19T14:22:16.939+01:00 (from jboss-server-2)
```

Finally create a playbook to collect the two playbooks already made, by creating a file named *main.yml* in *$WORK_DIR* with the following content:

```
---
- import_playbook: lb.yml
- import_playbook: site.yml
```

By running this playbook, you can setup everything with one command.

```
End of lab
```
[Go to the next lab, lab 5](../lab-5/README.md)

Commit message:

replaced mkdir with ansible-galaxy init

labs/lab-4/README.md, after:

# Writing the load balancer playbook

In the previous lab, we created two wildfly swarm servers running our application. The next step is to setup a loadbalancer. We will use nginx as the loadbalancer in this lab.

A role has already been written for installing nginx with Ansible. The role can be found at the Ansible Galaxy site (https://galaxy.ansible.com/nginxinc/nginx/). [Ansible Galaxy](https://galaxy.ansible.com) is the place where roles and modules are shared. As always be critical when using content on the internet. In this case the nginx organisation has made an official role for nginx, so we should be good.

First we need to install the role for nginx. Run:

```
$ansible-galaxy install nginxinc.nginx
```

and wait for the role to be installed. When that is done, we can use the role in our playbooks.

To install nginx go to $WORK_DIR and create a new file named *lb.yml* with the following content:

```
---
- hosts: lbservers
  become: true
  tasks:
  - include_role:
      name: nginxinc.nginx
```

run the playbook with the command

```
$ansible-playbook -i hosts lb.yml
```

this will install nginx on the servers in the lbservers group. To verify the installation, go to the url *http://$lb_server_name*. You should get the nginx default page.

Next step is to configure nginx as a loadbalancer for the two wildflyapp servers. To do so, we'll add an additional role for the configuration. We follow the [best practises for Ansible directory layout](http://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_best_practices.html) and place tasks, handlers, and vars in separate directories. This is enforced by using the following command:

```
$ansible-galaxy init roles/nginx-config
```

First we'll create a handler for restarting the nginx service in case of configuration changes. Define the handler in the file *$WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/handlers/main.yml* with the following content:

```
---
- name: restart-nginx-service
  systemd:
    state: restarted
    daemon_reload: yes
    name: nginx
```

This defines a handler named *restart-nginx-service*, which we'll use in a moment. Now edit the file *$WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/tasks/main.yml* with the following content:

```
---
- name: Setup the http listener to your machines
  template:
    src: default.template
    dest: /etc/nginx/conf.d/default.conf
  notify: restart-nginx-service
- name: Ensure nginx is in state started, so it'll be available on restart
  systemd:
    name: nginx
    enabled: yes
    masked: no
    state: started
- name: Set (httpd_can_network_connect) flag on and keep it persistent across reboots
  seboolean:
    name: httpd_can_network_connect
    state: yes
    persistent: yes
```
A template is used to setup the http listener. The template ensures that your configuration file doesn't have to be static. In this case, you need to add the servers to loadbalance between. This is done by introducing a variable *wildfy_servers*, which you'll use when writing the template shortly. The configuration file is saved instead of the default.conf nginx template. Other approaches applies. Please refer to the nginx documentation for more information. If the configuration file is changed, the previously defined handler (*notify: restart-nginx-service*) ensures, that the nginx process is restarted. Finally a SELinux rule has to be setup, to allow nginx to connect to port 8080.

Define the variable *wildfly_servers* in the file named *$WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/vars/main.yml* with the following content:

```
---
wildfly_servers: "{{ groups['wildflyservers'] }}"
```

Edit $WORK_DIR/lb.yml to include the newly created role:

```
---
- hosts: lbservers
  tasks:
  - include_role:
      name: nginxinc.nginx
  - include_role:
      name: nginx-config
```

After having extended the playbook to add the loadbalancer configuration, you need to add the template file for the configuration. In your favorite editor save a file named *default.template* in dir *$WORK_DIR/roles/nginx-config/templates/* with the following content:

```
upstream backend {
{% for host in wildfly_servers %}
    server {{ hostvars[host].ansible_host }}:8080;
{% endfor %}
}
server {
    listen       80;
    server_name  localhost;
    
    access_log  /var/log/nginx/host.access.log  main;
    
    location / {
        proxy_pass http://backend;
    }
    
    # redirect server error pages to the static page /50x.html
    #
    error_page   500 502 503 504  /50x.html;
    location = /50x.html {
        root   /usr/share/nginx/html;
    }
}
```

as you can see, the *wildfly_servers* variable is used to iterate over the servers with the wildfly application deployed. Apply the new changes to the playbook by running the command:

```
$ansible-playbook -i hosts lb.yml
```

Now test, that you can access the application on both application servers. In the command promt write:

```
$curl -w '\n' http://<server name for nginx server>/
```

you should get a different servername responding each time like in this output:

```
$ curl -w '\n' http://10.211.55.23/
Howdy from unknown at 2018-02-19T14:22:03.375+01:00 (from jboss-server-2)
$ curl -w '\n' http://10.211.55.23/
Howdy from unknown at 2018-02-19T14:22:06.651+01:00 (from jboss-server-3)
$ curl -w '\n' http://10.211.55.23/
Howdy from unknown at 2018-02-19T14:22:16.939+01:00 (from jboss-server-2)
```

Finally create a playbook to collect the two playbooks already made, by creating a file named *main.yml* in *$WORK_DIR* with the following content:

```
---
- import_playbook: lb.yml
- import_playbook: site.yml
```

By running this playbook, you can setup everything with one command.

```
End of lab
```
[Go to the next lab, lab 5](../lab-5/README.md)
