labs/lab-5/README.md, before:

# Handling Secrets with Ansible Vault

Most applications have secret properties, which must not be shown to every person working with the playbooks. The application you're working with is no exception, so you've been asked to set an environment variable named *SECRET_NAME* on the WildFly application servers for the application to work properly - and that environment variable needs to be encrypted. Fortunately for you, this is pretty easy with Ansible.

:thumbsup: With Ansible you can encrypt any part of your playbooks or property files. Once the content or files has been encrypted, the content is unreadable. Ansible uses strong 256 bit symmetric encryption to do this. This has one unwanted effect, which is that you'll then be unable to search for the property. Therefore it's considered best practise to have an unencrypted file refer to the encrypted file. 

:boom: Now we're going to put our secret information into a a file named **$WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml** and refer to it from a file called **$WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vars.yml**. This is achieved with the following steps. In your terminal, run:

```
mkdir -p $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers
echo 'wildfly_secret_content: "{{ wildfly_secret_vault }}"' > $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vars.yml
echo 'wildfly_secret_vault: Red Hat' > $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml
```

As you can see, some refactoring has been done to ensure that it is possible to use different configurations for different environments. This is achieved by having different environment folders in the *group_vars* directory. In this case a dev group variable file is created by adding specific settings in the folder *$WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/*. 

:boom: Servers can belong to several groups, so in the **$WORK_DIR/hosts** file we will now add the group *dev* with all servers listed. Change the content of **$WORK_DIR/hosts** so that it looks like below. (Please note that the ansible_host statement is only done once):

```
[lbservers]
loadbalancer1 ansible_host=xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx

[wildflyservers]
wildfly1 ansible_host=yyy.yyy.yyy.yyy
wildfly2 ansible_host=zzz.zzz.zzz.zzz

[dev]
loadbalancer1
wildfly1
wildfly2
```

 :exclamation: As before, change xxx.yyy.zzz to the IP-addresses assigned to you.

Now Ansible will include all variables defined in *$WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/* for the servers listed, each time the playbook is run.

:boom: Finally, let's encrypt the vault file, which contains our secret. Please note that you will be prompted for a password and **it's important that you remember which password you choose**. In the prompt write:

```
ansible-vault encrypt $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml
```

:boom: Have a look at the content of the file by running the following command:
```
cat $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml
```
The output should be something like below:
```
$ cat $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml
$ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256
36333739306564633634663666363663336632326433303766346165313232336162353965313335
3130343933373237643233346433663666626337303162380a303637346561666132333862643965
64386439373839346566616364653930623565663439643563313237626365383838303636336638
6264303836646235300a356630393765653435393837363964616365353466616166616631646339
30353632643365626562343863633165656632313365656532306335636435663365
$
```

 :thumbsup: The next step is to add the newly created variable as an environment variable to the playbook for the WildFly app role. At the same time we'll make some other changes. It's considered best practise to only set the environment variable locally for the wildflyapp service. Thus we are required to change the service script file from a static file to a template file in order to be able to change the secret name. Furthermore, we want to restart the WildFly service in order to ensure that the service is restarted in case there are changes in the jar file or in the configuration. 

:boom: To do so, change the content of *$WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/tasks/main.yml* to the following:

```
---
- name: Install java
  yum:
    name: java-headless
- name: Create directory to store binary
  file:
    path: /opt/wildflyapp
    state: directory
- name: Copy jar file to the server
  copy:
    src: binaries/example-jaxrs-war-swarm.jar
    dest: /opt/wildflyapp/example-jaxrs-war-swarm.jar
    mode: 0644
  register: jar_file_copy
- name: Create service script
  template:
    src: wildflyapp.template
    dest: /etc/systemd/system/wildflyapp.service
    owner: root
    group: root
    mode: 0644
  register: service_script_create
  no_log: true
- name: Reload systemd
  systemd:
    daemon_reload: yes
- name: Enable wildfly app service script
  systemd:
    name: wildflyapp
    enabled: yes
    masked: no
    state: started
  no_log: true
- name: Restart the wildfly app if there are any changes
  systemd: 
    name: wildflyapp
    state: restarted 
  when: jar_file_copy.changed or service_script_create.changed
  no_log: true
```
:thumbsup: Notice the addition of no_log to ensure that no details about our secret is logged.

:boom: Rename the service script from 'wildflyapp.service' to 'wildflyapp.template' to reflect that it is now a template file. Move it from the directory '$WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/files/' to '$WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/templates/':

```
mv $WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/files/wildflyapp.service $WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/templates/wildflyapp.template
```

:boom: Change the content of the service script file to include our secret. *$WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/templates/wildflyapp.template* should now have the below content:

```
[Unit]
Description=Wildfly Swarm Application Script
After=auditd.service systemd-user-sessions.service time-sync.target

[Service]
Environment="SECRET_NAME={{ wildfly_secret_content }}"
User=root
TimeoutStartSec=0
Type=simple
KillMode=process
WorkingDirectory=/opt/wildflyapp
ExecStart=/bin/java -jar /opt/wildflyapp/example-jaxrs-war-swarm.jar
Restart=always
RestartSec=2
LimitNOFILE=5555

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

As you can see, the secret name is added to the template.

:boom: To run the playbook with your vault, you'll be required to give Ansible your password. Do so by creating a file named *mypassword* and put the password in the file. You can do so by running below command in your terminal:
```
export HISTFILE=/dev/null
echo "mypass123" >$WORK_DIR/mypassword
export HISTFILE=/home/student/.bash_history
```

Alternatively edit the password file in an editor!

:boom: Then run Ansible with the following command:

```
cd $WORK_DIR
ansible-playbook -i hosts site.yml --vault-password-file mypassword
```

The playbook should complete as such:
```
PLAY RECAP ****************************************************************
wildfly1                   : ok=8    changed=2    unreachable=0    failed=0   
wildfly2                   : ok=8    changed=2    unreachable=0    failed=0
```

:boom: And you should now be able to access the url of loadbalancer1 by running _curl_ again. Try it as shown below:
```
$ curl -w '\n' http://<loadbalancer_IP>/
Howdy from Red Hat at 2018-08-31T08:45:38.084Z (from <loadbalancer_FQDN>)
$ curl -w '\n' http://<loadbalancer_IP>/
Howdy from Red Hat at 2018-08-31T08:45:39.489Z (from <loadbalancer_FQDN>)
```
Observe the changes. Hint, you are no longer getting an anonymous greeting.

:exclamation: If the output looks like the one below, you were just a bit quick to test the curl call. Wait for a second or three and try again.
```
$ curl -w '\n' <loadbalancer_IP>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<title>Error</title>
<style>
    body {
        width: 35em;
        margin: 0 auto;
        font-family: Tahoma, Verdana, Arial, sans-serif;
    }
</style>
</head>
<body>
<h1>An error occurred.</h1>
<p>Sorry, the page you are looking for is currently unavailable.<br/>
Please try again later.</p>
<p>If you are the system administrator of this resource then you should check
the error log for details.</p>
<p><em>Faithfully yours, nginx.</em></p>
</body>
</html>
```

:star: The observant student will note that there are some poor design choices in the above approach. Please correct the errors.

Hint:
* What did you learn about handlers in previous session?
* Does above solution use handlers appropriately?
* Is the when clause in above solution the best approach?

:star: Consider how you would handle a test environment with the *wildfly_secret_content* of 'Red Hat (test)'.

```
End of lab
```
[Go to the next lab, lab 6](../lab-6/README.md)

Commit message:

Added --ask-vault-pass alternative

labs/lab-5/README.md, after:

# Handling Secrets with Ansible Vault

Most applications have secret properties, which must not be shown to every person working with the playbooks. The application you're working with is no exception, so you've been asked to set an environment variable named *SECRET_NAME* on the WildFly application servers for the application to work properly - and that environment variable needs to be encrypted. Fortunately for you, this is pretty easy with Ansible.

:thumbsup: With Ansible you can encrypt any part of your playbooks or property files. Once the content or files has been encrypted, the content is unreadable. Ansible uses strong 256 bit symmetric encryption to do this. This has one unwanted effect, which is that you'll then be unable to search for the property. Therefore it's considered best practise to have an unencrypted file refer to the encrypted file. 

:boom: Now we're going to put our secret information into a a file named **$WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml** and refer to it from a file called **$WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vars.yml**. This is achieved with the following steps. In your terminal, run:

```
mkdir -p $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers
echo 'wildfly_secret_content: "{{ wildfly_secret_vault }}"' > $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vars.yml
echo 'wildfly_secret_vault: Red Hat' > $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml
```

As you can see, some refactoring has been done to ensure that it is possible to use different configurations for different environments. This is achieved by having different environment folders in the *group_vars* directory. In this case a dev group variable file is created by adding specific settings in the folder *$WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/*. 

:boom: Servers can belong to several groups, so in the **$WORK_DIR/hosts** file we will now add the group *dev* with all servers listed. Change the content of **$WORK_DIR/hosts** so that it looks like below. (Please note that the ansible_host statement is only done once):

```
[lbservers]
loadbalancer1 ansible_host=xxx.xxx.xxx.xxx

[wildflyservers]
wildfly1 ansible_host=yyy.yyy.yyy.yyy
wildfly2 ansible_host=zzz.zzz.zzz.zzz

[dev]
loadbalancer1
wildfly1
wildfly2
```

 :exclamation: As before, change xxx.yyy.zzz to the IP-addresses assigned to you.

Now Ansible will include all variables defined in *$WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/* for the servers listed, each time the playbook is run.

:boom: Finally, let's encrypt the vault file, which contains our secret. Please note that you will be prompted for a password and **it's important that you remember which password you choose**. In the prompt write:

```
ansible-vault encrypt $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml
```

:boom: Have a look at the content of the file by running the following command:
```
cat $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml
```
The output should be something like below:
```
$ cat $WORK_DIR/group_vars/dev/wildflyservers/vault.yml
$ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256
36333739306564633634663666363663336632326433303766346165313232336162353965313335
3130343933373237643233346433663666626337303162380a303637346561666132333862643965
64386439373839346566616364653930623565663439643563313237626365383838303636336638
6264303836646235300a356630393765653435393837363964616365353466616166616631646339
30353632643365626562343863633165656632313365656532306335636435663365
$
```

 :thumbsup: The next step is to add the newly created variable as an environment variable to the playbook for the WildFly app role. At the same time we'll make some other changes. It's considered best practise to only set the environment variable locally for the wildflyapp service. Thus we are required to change the service script file from a static file to a template file in order to be able to change the secret name. Furthermore, we want to restart the WildFly service in order to ensure that the service is restarted in case there are changes in the jar file or in the configuration. 

:boom: To do so, change the content of *$WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/tasks/main.yml* to the following:

```
---
- name: Install java
  yum:
    name: java-headless
- name: Create directory to store binary
  file:
    path: /opt/wildflyapp
    state: directory
- name: Copy jar file to the server
  copy:
    src: binaries/example-jaxrs-war-swarm.jar
    dest: /opt/wildflyapp/example-jaxrs-war-swarm.jar
    mode: 0644
  register: jar_file_copy
- name: Create service script
  template:
    src: wildflyapp.template
    dest: /etc/systemd/system/wildflyapp.service
    owner: root
    group: root
    mode: 0644
  register: service_script_create
  no_log: true
- name: Reload systemd
  systemd:
    daemon_reload: yes
- name: Enable wildfly app service script
  systemd:
    name: wildflyapp
    enabled: yes
    masked: no
    state: started
  no_log: true
- name: Restart the wildfly app if there are any changes
  systemd: 
    name: wildflyapp
    state: restarted 
  when: jar_file_copy.changed or service_script_create.changed
  no_log: true
```
:thumbsup: Notice the addition of no_log to ensure that no details about our secret is logged.

:boom: Rename the service script from 'wildflyapp.service' to 'wildflyapp.template' to reflect that it is now a template file. Move it from the directory '$WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/files/' to '$WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/templates/':

```
mv $WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/files/wildflyapp.service $WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/templates/wildflyapp.template
```

:boom: Change the content of the service script file to include our secret. *$WORK_DIR/roles/wildflyapp/templates/wildflyapp.template* should now have the below content:

```
[Unit]
Description=Wildfly Swarm Application Script
After=auditd.service systemd-user-sessions.service time-sync.target

[Service]
Environment="SECRET_NAME={{ wildfly_secret_content }}"
User=root
TimeoutStartSec=0
Type=simple
KillMode=process
WorkingDirectory=/opt/wildflyapp
ExecStart=/bin/java -jar /opt/wildflyapp/example-jaxrs-war-swarm.jar
Restart=always
RestartSec=2
LimitNOFILE=5555

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

As you can see, the secret name is added to the template.

:boom: To run the playbook with your vault, you'll be required to give Ansible your password. Do so by creating a file named *mypassword* and put the password in the file. You can do so by running below command in your terminal:
```
export HISTFILE=/dev/null
echo "mypass123" >$WORK_DIR/mypassword
export HISTFILE=/home/student/.bash_history
```

Alternatively edit the password file in an editor!

:boom: Then run Ansible with the following command:

```
cd $WORK_DIR
ansible-playbook -i hosts site.yml --vault-password-file mypassword
```
:boom: Alternatively, you can interactively enter the vault password when running the playbook:
```
ansible-playbook -i hosts site.yml --ask-vault-pass
```

The playbook should complete as such:
```
PLAY RECAP ****************************************************************
wildfly1                   : ok=8    changed=2    unreachable=0    failed=0   
wildfly2                   : ok=8    changed=2    unreachable=0    failed=0
```

:boom: And you should now be able to access the url of loadbalancer1 by running _curl_ again. Try it as shown below:
```
$ curl -w '\n' http://<loadbalancer_IP>/
Howdy from Red Hat at 2018-08-31T08:45:38.084Z (from <loadbalancer_FQDN>)
$ curl -w '\n' http://<loadbalancer_IP>/
Howdy from Red Hat at 2018-08-31T08:45:39.489Z (from <loadbalancer_FQDN>)
```
Observe the changes. Hint, you are no longer getting an anonymous greeting.

:exclamation: If the output looks like the one below, you were just a bit quick to test the curl call. Wait for a second or three and try again.
```
$ curl -w '\n' <loadbalancer_IP>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<title>Error</title>
<style>
    body {
        width: 35em;
        margin: 0 auto;
        font-family: Tahoma, Verdana, Arial, sans-serif;
    }
</style>
</head>
<body>
<h1>An error occurred.</h1>
<p>Sorry, the page you are looking for is currently unavailable.<br/>
Please try again later.</p>
<p>If you are the system administrator of this resource then you should check
the error log for details.</p>
<p><em>Faithfully yours, nginx.</em></p>
</body>
</html>
```

:star: The observant student will note that there are some poor design choices in the above approach. Please correct the errors.

Hint:
* What did you learn about handlers in previous session?
* Does above solution use handlers appropriately?
* Is the when clause in above solution the best approach?

:star: Consider how you would handle a test environment with the *wildfly_secret_content* of 'Red Hat (test)'.

```
End of lab
```
[Go to the next lab, lab 6](../lab-6/README.md)
